1. Intro to Design Language System DLS

- how does it look like, what does it do and who should use it

2. How doe we build a DLS
3. Why should we have a DLS

- Success factor

> How does a DLS look like?
> "In summary, a design system is a collection of documents, articles, examples, code snippets, screenshots,
> design guidelines, components, philosphies and other digital assets for a product design company.

Usually hosted online as a website (public/internally)

Think of it as a big knowledge base that is part UI kit, part documentation with instructions, language and coding guidelines all wrapped up together.

It should contain a toolbox, naming conventions. grid system, typography and pattern library.

Ultimate goal of design system is to enhance brand recognizability while maintaining consistency and autheticity.

> What does a Dls do?
> Serve as single source of truth

- knowledge transfer tool for everyone in the digital ecosystem of an organization. Ensure apps have standard looks across the board

Uses Atomic Design

- as a metholdology to categorise UI components to make it easier to search for

Is UI framwork agnostic

- The functional implementations of components on the Design Language System Site should not have many external dependecies.

Provide functional / behavioral refernce of UI Components

- Developers can experience how components behave & look

Enforces a governance process for design

- Designers & developers learn to build components on top of existing components and share them

Who does DLS serve?
Brand - consistency and recognisability
-Everyone in the organisation is on the same page making project output consistent & recognizable. Increase brand regonition

User - Clarity & Independence
Less confusion as the DLS is the authorative and enables user to learn independently about the design in the organisation

Business - Time and Cost Saving

- well maintained DLS reduces communications overhead and training time for new joiners/ contractors in design and development

Use cases for Developers

- Understand component states and state changes
- Obtain up to date properties and code of UI components
- Understand how components integrate with each other

Atomic design
Atomic design is methodology for creating design systems. There are distinct levels in atomic design:

Foundation (eg. colors, typography)
Atoms (eg. buttons)
Molecules (eg. cards)
Organisms (eg. carousel)
Templates (eg. layouts)
Pages

https://bradfrost.com/blog/post/atomic-web-design/

Process of Building DLS

1. Identify

- perform UI audit, collect list of components and new design assets.

2. Categorize

- Create / update DLS information architecture using Atomic Design

3. Design

- Design each component and its stat

4. Implement

- Implement each component and add it to DLS website

https://storybook.js.org
Add storybook to your app - npm run storybook
-Storybook brings together UI, examples, and documentation in one place. That helps teammates adopt existing UI patterns.

(There are storybook alternatives as well.)

DLS is a syetm of tool thats allow for rapid production for both designers and developers. DLS come is various levels of robustness based on organisational needs. In short, DLS helps to enable design operations

- scaled design

  > teams always grow & change. A shared source of truth makes maintaining large scale design projects easier

- improve usablity

  > when multiple blocks of code are created for similar elements, it creates conflicts and increase page load. A design systems builds a library of elements so less time is spent on quality assurance

- iterate faster

  > a design system creates building blocks that enable teams to piece together flows and interaction faster. This means fast prototyping to test and evolve the application, gaining better data and insights.

- design consistently
  > By standardizing components, we ensure that there is consistency across all aplication. It means we spend less time on styling and more time for other tasks.

DLS have similar elements
(color systems, typography, form components...)

<hr/>

Dexie.js for offline Data Storage

Why store when there is state?

To ensure data does not get removed when you restart

Why store in browser when there's a database on the server?

To prevent data jumbled in backend, in a to-do list example, the data does not need to be sent to backend at all.

Why not LocalStorage?

- only string data
- 5 mb limit across major browsers
- vulnerable to XSS attacks
- It's synchronous (only 1 thing can happen at a time with local storage)

IndexedDB

- A database browser
- Asynchronous
- Storage Limited on user's disk space
- Can store multiple data types
- Structured
- Data can be queried/ filtered

Cons of IndexedDb

- not support on some legacy browsers
- can get complex to use
- poor queries

<a href="https://dexie.org">Dexie.js</a>
A Minimalistic Wrapper for IndexedDB

<a href="https://dexie.org/docs/Tutorial/React" >Get started with Dexie on React</a>

- UseLiveQuery
  > Observe IndexedDB data in your React component. Make the component re-render when the observed data changes.
